What public transportation options are feasible with the small population in the Adelaide Hills?
Josh Newman
18/08/2023
The hilly terrain, dense forests, and picturesque wine regions of the Adelaide Hills are located on around 1500 square kilometres of land, making the region larger than some small countries. However, despite the region being half the size of the Adelaide metropolitan area, its population of around 100,000 people is around one tenth of the city. This sparse population is generally the reason given for the lack of efficient public transportation services in the region, but with towns like Mount Barker now being recognised as small cities, could this idea now be outdated?
One option often discussed is expanding the bus services. Currently, the Adelaide Hills is only serviced by one main bus route (864 and variations) on all days of the week. While other routes exist, most only run on weekdays, and many only in peak hour. Improving frequency of the routes could make public transport a more attractive option. However, the survey has shown that more frequent busses alone will likely not be enough to convince people to commute by bus due to the lack of options and poor infrastructure. Currently, shelters are often not present at bus stops to shield the weather, and other amenities like lights, bins and nearby toilets are often not present. In the survey, over half of participants identified these factors to limit the feasibility of public transport. This survey also showed most other factors, such as cost, were not a limiting factor since most people would be taking the bus instead of driving. To greatly improve bus ridership, the local councils and Adelaide Metro could work to expand and create new routes and build new infrastructure.
The construction of a light rail network connecting the larger towns has also been proposed. While this would likely not be feasible to link towns with low populations, smaller systems could link the more populated areas, like the Mount Barker and Stirling areas. Regular commuter train services stopping in Hills towns along the existing Belair line have useful, but very difficult to expand due to the freight operations and the curved track layout which limits the additions of more stations. 
While public transportation is important for accessibility, residential growth, and environmental sustainability; the solutions are not straightforward for an area with a sparse population dispersed over many communities. To link suburbs, a combination of expanded regional bus services and train networks to link suburbs with existing tracks could be used. While tram networks could be used to connect different towns in the more densely populated communities. Although this plan would require cooperation across different levels of government and a substantial investment, it would be extremely beneficial to the Hills region.